---
title: "Running an enablement session"
date: "2024-03-30"
author: "Hido"
tags: ["product", "psychology"]
draft: false
---

[Rolling out enablement]({{<ref "/posts/2024-03-04-enablement-part-of-rollout">}}) as part of a product release ensures the usage is smooth and seamless. There are multiple ways one can integrate enablement into user experience. This post will focus on running an enablement session within organisation. Enablement sessions are crucial for sharing knowledge, aligning product features, gathering feedback, growing the skills of users which adds to the innovative culture of the ogranisation. Running an effective enablement session requires careful planning and execution. There are several key strategies to ensure your enablement sessions are engaging, informative, and valuable for all participants. Let's look at some of them in detail:

  1) **Send out an invitation with detailed description**: When planning your enablement session, start by creating a comprehensive invitation. Include a full description of what the session will cover and why it's important for people to attend. Clearly communicate the objectives, agenda, and expected outcomes. This will help potential participants understand the value of the session and encourage them to prioritize it in their schedules.
  2) **Accomodate schedule of the attendants**: Recognize that not everyone may be able to attend your enablement session due to conflicting schedules or limited availability. To ensure maximum participation, offer multiple slot options for the session. If it's still not possible for everyone to attend, consider recording the session and sharing it with those who couldn't make it.
  3) **Engage participants from the start**: To create an interactive and engaging environment, involve your participants from the beginning. Ideally already prior to the session, ask them about their expectations and if they have any specific questions or topics they'd like to discuss. This will help you tailor the content to their needs and keep them engaged throughout the session.
  4) **Test the technology beforehand**: If you plan to stream the session or use any tools (i.e. presentation, demo, etc.), it's crucial to test the technology multiple times before the actual event. This will help you identify and resolve any potential issues, ensuring a smooth and uninterrupted experience for all participants.
  5) **Make the session interactive**: During the enablement session, avoid one-way communication by encouraging participation and interaction. Ask questions, facilitate discussions, and create opportunities for attendees to share their insights and experiences. This will not only keep them engaged but also foster a collaborative learning environment.
  6) **Gamify the session**: To add an element of fun and friendly competition, consider gamifying your enablement session. Incorporate a quiz or challenge related to the topic and award the winner with a prize or recognition. This will not only keep participants engaged but also reinforce the key takeaways from the session.
  7) **Gather feedback**: At the end of the session, ask participants to provide feedback on their experience. This can be done through a simple survey or an open discussion. Their input will help you identify areas for improvement and ensure that future enablement sessions are even more effective and valuable.
  8) **Provide a post-session written artifact**: After the session, send a structured summary of the content covered during the enablement session. This written artifact will serve as a reference for participants and help reinforce the knowledge shared. It can also be shared with those who couldn't attend the session, ensuring everyone has access to the important information.
  
  There are additionally many other smaller hints and tricks to provide an informative, fun and effective learning experience. In its core it comes down to bi-directional communication with the users. By understanding why they use your product and how they are interacting with it, you can create an invaluable learning experience for your users and for yourself.